
<div name="index">
<p><a name="__index__"></a></p>

<ul>

	<li><a href="#name">NAME</a></li>
	<li><a href="#overview">OVERVIEW</a></li>
	<li><a href="#download">DOWNLOAD</a></li>
	<li><a href="#installation">INSTALLATION</a></li>
	<li><a href="#implementation">IMPLEMENTATION</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#precision">Precision</a></li>
		<li><a href="#context">Context</a></li>
		<li><a href="#naming_convention">Naming Convention</a></li>
		<li><a href="#mutability">Mutability</a></li>
		<li><a href="#conversion">Conversion</a></li>
	</ul>

	<li><a href="#examples">EXAMPLES</a></li>
	<li><a href="#verification_tests">VERIFICATION TESTS</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#unit_tests">Unit Tests</a></li>
		<li><a href="#performance_tests">Performance Tests</a></li>
		<li><a href="#compliance_test">Compliance Test</a></li>
	</ul>

	<li><a href="#reference">REFERENCE</a></li>
	<li><a href="#decimal_numbers">Decimal Numbers</a></li>
	<li><a href="#decimal_contexts">Decimal Contexts</a></li>
	<li><a href="#random_states">Random States</a></li>
	<li><a href="#constants">Constants</a></li>
	<li><a href="#rounding">Rounding</a></li>
	<li><a href="#status_flags">Status Flags</a></li>
	<li><a href="#classifications">Classifications</a></li>
	<li><a href="#initialization_descriptors">Initialization Descriptors</a></li>
	<li><a href="#compile_time_configuration">Compile time configuration</a></li>
	<li><a href="#operations_on_contexts">Operations on Contexts</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#decnumber_getcontext"><code>decNumber.getcontext</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_duplicate"><code>decctx:duplicate</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setcontext"><code>decctx:setcontext</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setdefault"><code>decctx:setdefault</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getclamp"><code>decctx:getclamp</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getdigits"><code>decctx:getdigits</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getemax"><code>decctx:getemax</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getemin"><code>decctx:getemin</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getround"><code>decctx:getround</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getstatus"><code>decctx:getstatus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_getstatusstring"><code>decctx:getstatusstring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_gettraps"><code>decctx:gettraps</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setclamp"><code>decctx:setclamp</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setdigits"><code>decctx:setdigits</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setemax"><code>decctx:setemax</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setemin"><code>decctx:setemin</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setround"><code>decctx:setround</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setstatus"><code>decctx:setstatus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_setstatusstring"><code>decctx:setstatusstring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decctx_settraps"><code>decctx:settraps</code></a></li>
	</ul>

	<li><a href="#operations_on_numbers">Operations on Numbers</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#decnum___concat"><code>decnum:__concat</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_toengstring"><code>decnum:toengstring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnumber_tonumber"><code>decNumber.tonumber</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_tostring"><code>decnum:tostring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_abs"><code>decnum:abs</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_add"><code>decnum:add</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_copy"><code>decnum:copy</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_copyabs"><code>decnum:copyabs</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_copynegate"><code>decnum:copynegate</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_copysign"><code>decnum:copysign</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_divide"><code>decnum:divide</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_exp"><code>decnum:exp</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_floor"><code>decnum:floor</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_fma"><code>decnum:fma</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_invert"><code>decnum:invert</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_land"><code>decnum:land</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_ln"><code>decnum:ln</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_log10"><code>decnum:log10</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_logb"><code>decnum:logb</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_lor"><code>decnum:lor</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_max"><code>decnum:max</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_maxmag"><code>decnum:maxmag</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_min"><code>decnum:min</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_minmag"><code>decnum:minmag</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_minus"><code>decnum:minus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_mod"><code>decnum:mod</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_multiply"><code>decnum:multiply</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_nextminus"><code>decnum:nextminus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_nextplus"><code>decnum:nextplus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_nexttoward"><code>decnum:nexttoward</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_normalize"><code>decnum:normalize</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_plus"><code>decnum:plus</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_power"><code>decnum:power</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_quantize"><code>decnum:quantize</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_remainder"><code>decnum:remainder</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_remaindernear"><code>decnum:remaindernear</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_rescale"><code>decnum:rescale</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_rotate"><code>decnum:rotate</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_samequantum"><code>decnum:samequantum</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_scaleb"><code>decnum:scaleb</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_shift"><code>decnum:shift</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_squareroot"><code>decnum:squareroot</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_subtract"><code>decnum:subtract</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_tointegralexact"><code>decnum:tointegralexact</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_tointegralvalue"><code>decnum:tointegralvalue</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_trim"><code>decnum:trim</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_xor"><code>decnum:xor</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_class"><code>decnum:class</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_classasstring"><code>decnum:classasstring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#classtostring"><code>classtostring</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_compare"><code>decnum:compare</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_comparetotal"><code>decnum:comparetotal</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_comparetotalmag"><code>decnum:comparetotalmag</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_eq"><code>decnum:eq</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_iscanonical"><code>decnum:iscanonical</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isfinite"><code>decnum:isfinite</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isinfinite"><code>decnum:isinfinite</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isnan"><code>decnum:isnan</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isnegative"><code>decnum:isnegative</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isnormal"><code>decnum:isnormal</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isqnan"><code>decnum:isqnan</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_issnan"><code>decnum:issnan</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_isspecial"><code>decnum:isspecial</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_issubnormal"><code>decnum:issubnormal</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_iszero"><code>decnum:iszero</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_le"><code>decnum:le</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_lt"><code>decnum:lt</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decnum_radix"><code>decnum:radix</code></a></li>
	</ul>

	<li><a href="#operations_on_random_states">Operations on Random States</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#decnumber_randomstate"><code>decNumber.randomstate</code></a></li>
		<li><a href="#decrst___call"><code>decrst:__call</code></a></li>
	</ul>

	<li><a href="#version">VERSION</a></li>
	<li><a href="#credits">CREDITS</a></li>
	<li><a href="#license">LICENSE</a></li>
	<ul>

		<li><a href="#icu_license___icu_1_8_1_and_later">ICU License - ICU 1.8.1 and later</a></li>
		<li><a href="#ldecnumber_license">ldecNumber License</a></li>
	</ul>

</ul>

<hr name="index" />
</div>


<p>
</p>
<h1><a name="name">NAME</a></h1>
<p><strong>ldecNumber</strong> - a Lua 5.1 wrapper for the Decimal Number library 
<strong>decNumber</strong></p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="overview">OVERVIEW</a></h1>
<p>The <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package is a Lua module for General Decimal Arithmetic.
For the background and rationale for the design of the arithmetic, see 
Decimal Floating-Point: Algorism for Computers in the Proceedings of 
the 16th IEEE Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (Cowlishaw, M. F., 
2003). <a href="http://www2.hursley.ibm.com/decimal/IEEE-cowlishaw-arith16.pdf">http://www2.hursley.ibm.com/decimal/IEEE-cowlishaw-arith16.pdf</a>
The <strong>decNumber</strong> package, an arbitrary-precision implementation of 
the specifications in ANSI C, provides a reference implementation for 
both the arithmetic and the encodings, and is used as the basis for 
the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package. See Mike Cowlishaw's decimal page 
<a href="http://www2.hursley.ibm.com/decimal/">http://www2.hursley.ibm.com/decimal/</a> 
for more information and the latest versions of the <strong>decNumber</strong> 
package and test code.</p>
<p>The <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package was designed to provide the arithmetic 
facilities of the <strong>decNumber</strong> package with a Lua flavor. It is a 
loadable Lua module, designed for Lua 5.1.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="download">DOWNLOAD</a></h1>
<p><strong>ldecNumber</strong> source code can be downloaded from its 
LuaForge (<a href="http://luaforge.net/projects/ldecnumber/">http://luaforge.net/projects/ldecnumber/</a>) page.</p>
<p>The source code from the <strong>decNumber</strong> package and the decTest package are 
included in the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> distribution for a few reasons:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>A couple of minor modifications were made to decTest to correct syntax 
errors.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The <strong>decNumber</strong> package is fairly small, and including it is a 
convenience to users as well as a means of documenting exactly the 
code used to build and test the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>IBM's liberal ICU License allows me to do so!</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>The distribution also includes a copy of the decNumber C library 
User's Guide, <em>decNumber.pdf</em>. This is the best reference for the 
specification of most of the functions included in the <code>decNumber</code> 
module.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="installation">INSTALLATION</a></h1>
<p>A <em>Makefile</em> is provided.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="implementation">IMPLEMENTATION</a></h1>
<p>A few arbitrary choices were made in the implementation of the Lua 
wrapper.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="precision">Precision</a></h2>
<p>The size of structures used in the <strong>decNumber</strong> package determines the 
maximum number of decimal digits in decimal numbers it can manipulate.  
The default build of the <code>decNumber</code> module is configured for 69 digits. 
This number was chosen for a couple reasons: the resulting structure 
size is between 57 and 64 bytes in size (so each decimal number takes 
this this much space), and this precision is a bit more than twice 
what is needed for Decimal128 external format. Providing twice the 
external format's precision seemed like a good practice for mitigation 
of rounding issues during calculations with these numbers.</p>
<p><em>Note: the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package does not yet support any external binary 
formats, such as Decimal128, though it may in the future. Presently 
Lua strings and Lua numbers are the only &quot;external&quot; formats.</em></p>
<p>In any case, you may change the value of <code>DECNUMDIGITS</code> during a build 
of  the <code>decNumber</code> module to accommodate more digits, or reduce memory 
overhead if you need fewer digits. The  <code>decNumber</code> module has only been 
tested with the default setting, and one or two others.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="context">Context</a></h2>
<p>The decNumber context provides configuration settings such as working 
precision and rounding mode, and also holds condition flags. Functions 
in the <strong>decNumber</strong> package take a context argument. Using this approach 
in Lua would have made infix operator syntax impossible. This would 
not have been very Lua-like.</p>
<p>Instead, the  <code>decNumber</code> module automatically maintains a decNumber 
context per Lua thread. This thread decNumber context may be modified 
and inspected. It may also be retrieved and restored, so threads may 
maintain multiple contexts if desired. Modifications to the context 
in one thread do not affect the contexts in other threads, unless, of 
course, threads explicitly retrieve, exchange, and replace their 
contexts with a shared context. (If you don't use setcontext you 
don't need to worry!)</p>
<p>The default decNumber context is <code>DEC_INIT_DECIMAL128</code> as described  
in <em>decNumber.pdf</em>. This default may be changed during a build of the 
<code>decNumber</code> module by changing the value of <code>LDN_CONTEXT_DEFAULT</code>. 
The context method setdefault may be used to initialize a context to 
one of the well known default configurations.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="naming_convention">Naming Convention</a></h2>
<p>Names in the <strong>decNumber</strong> package follow a convention of a 
<code>decNumber</code> or <code>DEC_</code> prefix and mixed case, or for some constants, 
upper case. Lua code, on the other hand, tends toward lower case 
identifiers. I attempted to unify this by</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>using <code>decNumber</code> as the module name</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>stripping the prefix described above from the function 
names and constants (since the module name prefix will typically be 
there anyway)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>using lower case for function names, but otherwise 
retaining the spelling, and</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>retaining the case for constant names</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>There are two cases where in following these rules the <strong>decNumber</strong> 
names clash with Lua reserved words <code>or</code> and <code>and</code> -- in these 
cases the <strong>decNumber</strong> functions are called &quot;logical&quot; operations,
so I called the functions <code>lor</code> and <code>land</code>.</p>
<p>Wherever there was a predefined Lua metamethod, e. g., <code>__add</code>, the 
appropriate function is bound to that name as well as the <strong>decNumber</strong> 
package function name.</p>
<p>Where it seemed appropriate, functions are provided both as methods 
on decimal numbers, as well as functions in the <code>decNumber</code> module.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="mutability">Mutability</a></h2>
<p>The decimal numbers created by Lua are not mutable. This decision 
was based on my judgment that the potential performance benefit, 
mainly lower memory consumption and less garbage collection, was 
outweighed by the safety and lack of &quot;surprise&quot; that immutability 
provides. This makes decimal numbers compatible with Lua numbers 
and strings, both of which are also not mutable.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="conversion">Conversion</a></h2>
<p>All the functions in the <code>decNumber</code> module automatically convert 
their arguments from Lua numbers or strings as necessary to perform 
the operation. This conversion is done with the current settings in 
the thread decNumber context.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="examples">EXAMPLES</a></h1>
<p>The distribution contains an <em>examples</em> directory with Lua 
translations of some of the C examples from the <strong>decNumber</strong> package.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="verification_tests">VERIFICATION TESTS</a></h1>
<p>The distribution contains a test directory with a few test files.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="unit_tests">Unit Tests</a></h2>
<p>File: <em>ldecNumberUnitTest.lua</em></p>
<p>This is a small but expanding set of unit tests for the <code>decNumber</code> 
module. It uses the lunit module that can be obtained from Mike 
Roth's page <a href="http://www.nessie.de/mroth/lunit/">http://www.nessie.de/mroth/lunit/</a>.</p>
<p>File: <em>ldecNumberGausstest.lua</em></p>
<p>This is a small small tests for the 
<a href="#decnumber_randomstate"><code>decNumber.randomstate</code></a> 
function and use of <a href="#random_states">Random States</a>. It defines a Gaussian random
number generator, and tests it by graphing the result of many
executions. It uses the <strong>Lua DISLIN</strong> library for graphing, see
LuaForge for Lua DISLIN 
<a href="http://luaforge.net/projects/ldislin/files">http://luaforge.net/projects/ldislin/files</a>.</p>
<p>File: <em>ldecNumberThreadsTest.lua</em></p>
<p>This is a simple test that the decimal context in each thread is 
independent. It requires visual inspection of the results to verify 
that thread 1 is rounding ROUND_HALF_DOWN and thread 2 is rounding 
ROUND_HALF_EVEN.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="performance_tests">Performance Tests</a></h2>
<p>File: <em>ldecNumberPerf.lua</em></p>
<p>This is a simple test of the speed of some arbitrary <code>decNumber</code> 
module functions. It was useful to confirm that  decimal context 
caching was worthwhile. It relies on the lperformance module, which 
is included, but has been designed for WindowsXP.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="compliance_test">Compliance Test</a></h2>
<p>File: <em>ldecNumberTestDriver.lua</em></p>
<p>This is the big test. It uses dectest sources from IBM, and has 
over 60,000 test cases. The Lua file is a driver to execute the tests 
specified by dectest.</p>
<p>As of version 21 of the Lua <code>decNumber</code> module, the results for this 
test (dectest version 2.55) are:</p>
<p><code>For all 60937 tests, 59951 succeeded, 5 failed, 301 failed(conv), 644 skipped(#), 36 skipped(prec).</code></p>
<p>This is as good as possible with the default configuration. What this means is:</p>
<pre>
        59951 succeeded woot!
        5 failed        these 5 tests are know to fail in the decNumber C library;
             these edge cases are under reconsideration in the Decimal Number Specification
        301 failed(conv)         the precision required for the operands is insufficient in the Lua wrapper
        644 skipped(#)   the test is for NULL arguments or format conversions not supported
        36 skipped(prec) the test called for a  precision larger than provided in the Lua wrapper</pre>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="reference">REFERENCE</a></h1>
<p>Here is a reference to the data types, constants, and functions in the 
<code>decNumber</code> module. Many of these will refer to the decNumber C library 
User's Guide, <em>decNumber.pdf</em>, for implementation details.</p>
<p>The <code>decNumber</code> module defines three userdata types with their own 
metatables. These are <a href="#decimal_numbers">Decimal Numbers</a>, <a href="#decimal_contexts">Decimal Contexts</a>, and 
decimal <a href="#random_states">Random States</a>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="decimal_numbers">Decimal Numbers</a></h1>
<p>Decimal numbers are immutable numeric values. In the default 
configuration they can have up to 69 digits of precision, and 
exponents of -999999999 to 999999999.</p>
<p>Decimal numbers are created by the functions in the <code>decNumber</code> 
module. Since any arguments to these functions may be strings, 
Lua numbers, or decimal numbers, conversion from strings or 
Lua numbers to decimal numbers can be achieved in may ways. 
The function <a href="#decnumber_tonumber"><code>decNumber.tonumber</code></a> is 
the most obvious.</p>
<p>In the descriptions below, arguments or results that may be a 
string, Lua number, or decimal number are indicated by &lt;decarg&gt; 
whereas arguments or results that must be a  decimal number 
are indicated by <code>decnum</code>.</p>
<p>The metatable for decimal numbers is available as 
<code>decNumber.number_metatable</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="decimal_contexts">Decimal Contexts</a></h1>
<p>Decimal contexts are mutable records that contain</p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>flags that control behaviors of the <code>decNumber</code> module, such as 
precision and rounding</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>conditions that report the status of sequence of operations, 
such as overflow</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p>See <a href="#context">Context</a> for some rational on how the <code>decNumber</code> 
module manages contexts.</p>
<p>In the descriptions below, arguments or results that must be a  
decimal context are indicated by <code>decctx</code>.</p>
<p>The metatable for decimal contexts is available as 
<code>decNumber.context_metatable</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="random_states">Random States</a></h1>
<p>Random states are mutable records that contain opaque data for 
generation of random numbers.</p>
<p>See <a href="#operations_on_random_states">Operations on Random States</a> for the description of 
functions for creating and using random states.</p>
<p>In the descriptions below, arguments or results that must be a  
decimal context are indicated by <code>decrst</code>.</p>
<p>The metatable for decimal contexts is available as 
<code>decNumber.drandom_metatable</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="constants">Constants</a></h1>
<p>Here are the constants exposed in the <code>decNumber</code> module from the 
<strong>decNumber</strong> package.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="rounding">Rounding</a></h1>
<p>These numeric flags are used with 
<a href="#decctx_setround"><code>decctx:setround(x)</code></a></p>
<pre>
    decNumber.ROUND_CEILING     round towards +infinity
    decNumber.ROUND_UP          round away from 0
    decNumber.ROUND_HALF_UP     0.5 rounds up
    decNumber.ROUND_HALF_EVEN   0.5 rounds to nearest even
    decNumber.ROUND_HALF_DOWN   0.5 rounds down
    decNumber.ROUND_DOWN        round towards 0 (truncate)
    decNumber.ROUND_FLOOR       round towards -infinity
    decNumber.ROUND_05UP        round for reround</pre>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="status_flags">Status Flags</a></h1>
<p>These numeric status flags are used with 
<a href="#decctx_getstatus"><code>decctx:getstatus()</code></a></p>
<pre>
    decNumber.Conversion_syntax
    decNumber.Division_by_zero
    decNumber.Division_impossible
    decNumber.Division_undefined
    decNumber.Insufficient_storage
    decNumber.Inexact
    decNumber.Invalid_context
    decNumber.Invalid_operation
    decNumber.Overflow
    decNumber.Clamped
    decNumber.Rounded
    decNumber.Subnormal
    decNumber.Underflow</pre>
<p>These constants are combinations of the above status flags:</p>
<pre>
    decNumber.IEEE_854_Division_by_zero
    decNumber.IEEE_854_Inexact
    decNumber.IEEE_854_Invalid_operation
    decNumber.IEEE_854_Overflow
    decNumber.IEEE_854_Underflow
    decNumber.Errors       normally errors (results are qNaN, infinite, or 0)
    decNumber.NaNs         cause a result to become qNaN
    decNumber.Information  normally for information only (have finite results)</pre>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="classifications">Classifications</a></h1>
<p>These numeric classifications for decNumbers are aligned with IEEE 754r 
and are returned by 
<a href="#decnum_class"><code>decnum:class()</code></a> 
Note that 'normal' and 'subnormal' are meaningful only with a decContext.</p>
<pre>
    decNumber.CLASS_SNAN
    decNumber.CLASS_QNAN
    decNumber.CLASS_NEG_INF
    decNumber.CLASS_NEG_NORMAL
    decNumber.CLASS_NEG_SUBNORMAL
    decNumber.CLASS_NEG_ZERO
    decNumber.CLASS_POS_ZERO
    decNumber.CLASS_POS_SUBNORMAL
    decNumber.CLASS_POS_NORMAL
    decNumber.CLASS_POS_INF</pre>
<p>These classifications are also returned as string values from 
<a href="#decnum_classasstring"><code>decnum:classasstring()</code></a></p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="initialization_descriptors">Initialization Descriptors</a></h1>
<p>These constants are used with 
<a href="#decctx_setdefault"><code>decctx:setdefault(x)</code></a></p>
<pre>
    decNumber.INIT_BASE
    decNumber.INIT_DECIMAL32
    decNumber.INIT_DECIMAL64
    decNumber.INIT_DECIMAL128</pre>
<p>See note re: <code>decNumber.INIT_BASE</code> and traps, below in 
<a href="#decctx_setdefault"><code>decctx:setdefault(x)</code></a></p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="compile_time_configuration">Compile time configuration</a></h1>
<p>These constants provide information about the compile time 
configuration.</p>
<pre>
    decNumber.MAX_DIGITS  constant DECNUMDIGITS, the maximum precision</pre>
<pre>
    decNumber.version     a string with the decNumber module version information</pre>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="operations_on_contexts">Operations on Contexts</a></h1>
<p>The following functions operate on decimal contexts. See the 
decNumber C library User's Guide, <em>decNumber.pdf</em> for details 
about contexts, and constants used for manipulating them.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnumber_getcontext"><code>decNumber.getcontext</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decNumber.getcontext ()</pre>
<p>Returns the thread's current decimal context.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_duplicate"><code>decctx:duplicate</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:duplicate()</pre>
<p>Returns a copy of the decimal context argument. This may be used, 
for example, to save and restore a context around temporary 
modifications, or to keep multiple decimal contexts on hand for 
quick wholesale context changes (rather than changing individual 
fields). You probably don't ever need to do this!</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setcontext"><code>decctx:setcontext</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decNumber.setcontext (decctx)
    decctx:setcontext ()</pre>
<p>Sets the thread's decimal context to the argument, and returns 
the previous decimal context, i. e., the one that was just replaced. 
You probably don't ever need to do this!</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setdefault"><code>decctx:setdefault</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setdefault (initconst)</pre>
<p>Initializes the context argument to the settings specified by the 
initconst. See <a href="#initialization_descriptors">Initialization Descriptors</a> for permitted values for 
initconst. No values are returned.</p>
<p>Note: since traps are not supported, <code>decNumber.INIT_BASE</code> differs 
from the behavior documented in the decNumber C library User Guide in 
that it leaves traps disabled.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decContextDefault()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getclamp"><code>decctx:getclamp</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getclamp ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>clamp</code> field of the context 
argument. When 0, a result exponent is limited to <code>emax</code> (for 
example, the exponent of a zero result will be clamped to this value). 
When 1, a result exponent is limited to <code>emax-(digits-1)</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getdigits"><code>decctx:getdigits</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getdigits ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>digits</code> field of the context 
argument. This is the working precision for this decimal context. 
The results of decimal number operations will be rounded to this 
length if necessary.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getemax"><code>decctx:getemax</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getemax ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>emax</code> field of the context 
argument. This is the magnitude of the largest adjusted exponent 
that is permitted.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getemin"><code>decctx:getemin</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getemin ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>emin</code> field of the context 
argument. This is the smallest adjusted exponent that is permitted 
for normal numbers.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getround"><code>decctx:getround</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getround ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>round</code> field of the context 
argument. See <a href="#rounding">Rounding</a> for possible values.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getstatus"><code>decctx:getstatus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getstatus ()</pre>
<p>Returns the integer value of the <code>status</code> field of the context 
argument. See <a href="#status_flags">Status Flags</a> for possible values. In general, 
the result will be a bitwise-or of a subset of these values.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_getstatusstring"><code>decctx:getstatusstring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:getstatusstring ()</pre>
<p>Returns a string derived from the present value of the context 
argument's status field using the C library function 
<code>decContextStatusToString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_gettraps"><code>decctx:gettraps</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:gettraps ()</pre>
<p>Returns 0 (we hope!) since traps are not implemented in the 
Lua wrapper - use the status flags instead!</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setclamp"><code>decctx:setclamp</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setclamp (num)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>clamp</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>num</code>. When 0, a result exponent is limited to 
<code>emax</code> (for example, the exponent of a zero result will be 
clamped to this value). When 1, a result exponent is limited 
to <code>emax - (digits - 1)</code>.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of the <code>clamp</code> field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if num is not one of the values 0 or 1.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setdigits"><code>decctx:setdigits</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setdigits (num)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>digits</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>num</code>. This is the working precision for this 
decimal context. The results of subsequent decimal number 
operations will be rounded to this length if necessary.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of the <code>digits</code> field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if num exceeds <code>decNumber.MAX_DIGITS</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setemax"><code>decctx:setemax</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setemax (num)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>emax</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>num</code>. This is the magnitude of the largest 
adjusted exponent that is permitted.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of the <code>emax</code> field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if num is outside the range 
0 though 999,999,999.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setemin"><code>decctx:setemin</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setemin (num)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>emin</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>num</code>. This is the smallest adjusted exponent 
that is permitted for normal numbers. <code>emin</code> will usually equal 
<code>-emax</code>, but when a compressed format is used it will be 
<code>-(emax-1)</code>.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of the <code>emin</code> field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if num is outside the range 
-999,999,999 though 0.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setround"><code>decctx:setround</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setround (rounding)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>round</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>rounding</code>. This is used to select the rounding 
algorithm to be used if rounding is necessary during subsequent 
decimal number operations.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of the <code>round</code> field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if rounding is not one of the values 
described in <a href="#rounding">Rounding</a>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setstatus"><code>decctx:setstatus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setstatus (flags)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>status</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>flags</code>. See <a href="#status_flags">Status Flags</a> for possible values. 
In general, the flags will be a bitwise-or of a subset of these 
values. Usually the <code>flags</code> are 0 to clear all conditions.</p>
<p>Returns the previous value of  the status  field.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if flags is not a bitwise-or of a subset 
of the values in <a href="#status_flags">Status Flags</a>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_setstatusstring"><code>decctx:setstatusstring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:setstatusstring (flagname)</pre>
<p>Sets the decimal context's status bit corresponding to the name 
string argument <code>flagname</code> using the C library function 
<code>decContextSetStatusFromString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decctx_settraps"><code>decctx:settraps</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decctx:settraps (flags)</pre>
<p>Sets the integer value of the <code>traps</code> field of the context 
argument to <code>flags</code>.</p>
<p>Note that it is an error if <code>flags</code> is not zero since traps 
are not implemented in the Lua wrapper - use the status 
flags instead!</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="operations_on_numbers">Operations on Numbers</a></h1>
<p>The following functions operate on decimal numbers. In the 
descriptions below, arguments or results that may be a string, 
Lua number, or decimal number are indicated by <code>decarg</code> whereas 
arguments or results that must be a decimal number are indicated by 
<code>decnum</code>. See <a href="#decimal_numbers">Decimal Numbers</a>.</p>
<p>See the decNumber C library User's Guide, <em>decNumber.pdf</em> for 
details about limitations of the functions, and behavior in 
exceptional situations.</p>
<p><strong>Conversions</strong></p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum___concat"><code>decnum:__concat</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:__concat (&lt;string&gt;)</pre>
<p>Returns a string representing the value of the decimal number 
argument concatenated with the string argument. See 
<a href="#decnum_tostring"><code>decnum:tostring</code></a> below for a description 
of the conversion operation.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method __concat to this function, the 
Lua <code>..</code> concatenation operator will work with a decimal number 
and a string, in either order, due to Lua's internal application 
of this method when one side of the <code>..</code> concatenation operator 
is a decimal number.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberToString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_toengstring"><code>decnum:toengstring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:toengstring ()
    decNumber.toengstring (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a string representing the value of the argument (converted 
to a decimal number first if necessary) using engineering notation 
(where the exponent will be a multiple of three, and there may be 
up to three digits before any decimal point) if an exponent is needed. 
It implements the to-engineering-string conversion.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberToEngString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnumber_tonumber"><code>decNumber.tonumber</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decNumber.tonumber (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number. If the argument is a decimal number, it is 
simply returned. If the argument is a Lua number or string, it is 
converted, using the present decimal context as usual, to a decimal 
number and this value is returned.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberFromString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_tostring"><code>decnum:tostring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:tostring ()
    decnum:__tostring ()
    decNumber.tostring (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a string representing the value of the argument (converted to 
a decimal number first if necessary) using scientific notation if an 
exponent is needed (that is, there will be just one digit before any 
decimal point). It implements the to-scientific-string conversion.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__tostring</code> to this function, the 
Lua <code>print</code> and <code>tostring</code> functions will work with decimal numbers, 
using this conversion function.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberToString()</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Operations</strong></p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_abs"><code>decnum:abs</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:abs ()
    decNumber.abs (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the absolute value of the argument.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberAbs()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_add"><code>decnum:add</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:add (decarg)
    decnum:__add (decarg)
    decNumber.add (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the sum of its arguments.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__add</code> to this function, the 
Lua addition operator (<code>+</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the 
left and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberAdd()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_copy"><code>decnum:copy</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:copy ()
    decNumber.copy (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is a copy of its argument. This is 
not too useful since <code>decnum</code>s are immutable in <strong>ldecNumber</strong>,
but it could be used as an alternative to 
<a href="#decnum_tonumber"><code>decnum:tonumber</code></a>
No error is possible from this function when its argument is a 
<code>decnum</code>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCopy()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_copyabs"><code>decnum:copyabs</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:copyabs ()
    decNumber.copyabs (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the absolute value of its argument.
This is the quiet <code>abs</code> function described in IEEE 754r.
No error is possible from this function when its argument is a 
<code>decnum</code>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCopyAbs()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_copynegate"><code>decnum:copynegate</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:copynegate ()
    decNumber.copynegate (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the negation of its argument, in
other words it returns a copy of its argument with the sign inverted.
This is the quiet <code>negate</code> function described in IEEE 754r.
No error is possible from this function when its argument is a 
<code>decnum</code>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCopyNegate()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_copysign"><code>decnum:copysign</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:copysign (decarg)
    decNumber.copysign (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is a copy of its first argument but 
with the sign of its second argument.
This is the quiet <code>copysign</code> function described in IEEE 754r.
No error is possible from this function when its arguments are 
both <code>decnum</code>s.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCopySign()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_divide"><code>decnum:divide</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:divide (decarg)
    decnum:__div (decarg)
    decNumber.divide (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the left (1st) argument divided 
by the right (2nd) argument.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__div</code> to this function, the 
Lua division operator (<code>/</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the 
left and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberDivide()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:divideinteger (decarg)
    decNumber.divideinteger (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the integer part of the result 
of dividing of its arguments. Note that, per the <strong>decNumber</strong> 
specification, this is a convert to integer by truncation. If 
you want some other rounding mode, use <a href="#decnum_floor"><code>decnum:floor</code></a>, 
or for any rounding mode use 
<a href="#decnum_tointegralvalue"><code>decnum:tointegralvalue</code></a>
or <a href="#decnum_quantize"><code>decnum:quantize</code></a>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberDivideInteger()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_exp"><code>decnum:exp</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:exp ()
    decNumber.exp (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is e raised to the power of the argument.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberExp()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_floor"><code>decnum:floor</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:floor (decarg)
    decNumber.floor (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number integer that is the floor of the left (1st) 
argument divided by the right (2nd) argument. Contrast this with 
<a href="#decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a> which uses truncation.</p>
<p>The floor function is implemented as equal to 
<a href="#decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a> if the signs of the 
arguments are the same or if the remainder is zero, otherwise as equal 
to the <a href="#decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a> result minus 1. 
The current context's rounding mode is used. 
See <a href="#decnum_mod"><code>decnum:mod</code></a>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberDivideInteger()</code>, and then 
<code>decNumberMultiply()</code> followed by <code>decNumberCompare() decNumberIsZero()</code> 
to check if the remainder is zero, and <code>decNumberSubtract()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_fma"><code>decnum:fma</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:fma (decarg,decarg)
    decNumber.fma (decarg, decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the result of multiplying the first
argument by the second argument and then adding the third argument to 
that intermediate result. It is equivalent to a multiplication followed 
by an addition except that the intermediate result is not rounded and 
will not cause overflow or underflow. That is, only the final result 
is rounded and checked.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberFMA()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_invert"><code>decnum:invert</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:invert ()
    decNumber.invert (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the result of the digit-wise logical 
inversion of the argument (a 0 digit becomes 1 and vice versa).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberInvert()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_land"><code>decnum:land</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:land (decarg)
    decNumber.land (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the digit-wise logical and of the 
arguments. Note that all digits of the arguments must be 0 or 1 or
else this operation returns NaN,</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberAnd()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_ln"><code>decnum:ln</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:ln ()
    decNumber.ln (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the natural logarithm (logarithm in 
base e) of the argument.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberLn()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_log10"><code>decnum:log10</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:log10 ()
    decNumber.log10 (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the logarithm in base ten of the 
argument.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberLog10()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_logb"><code>decnum:logb</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:logb ()
    decNumber.logb (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the adjusted exponent of the 
argument, according to the rules for the <code>logB</code> operation of the 
IEEE 754r proposal. This returns the exponent of the argument as 
though its decimal point had been moved to follow the first digit 
while keeping the same value. The result is not limited by 
<code>emin</code> or <code>emax</code>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberLogB()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_lor"><code>decnum:lor</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:lor (decarg)
    decNumber.lor (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the digit-wise logical inclusive or 
of the arguments. Note that all digits of the arguments must be 0 or 
1 or else this operation returns NaN,</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberOr()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_max"><code>decnum:max</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:max (decarg)
    decNumber.max (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the maximum of its arguments.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMax()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_maxmag"><code>decnum:maxmag</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:maxmag (decarg)
    decNumber.maxmag (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the one of its arguments that 
has the maximum magnitude. It is identical to 
<a href="#decnum_max"><code>decnum:max</code></a> except that the signs of the operands 
are ignored and taken to be 0 (non-negative).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMaxMag()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_min"><code>decnum:min</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:min (decarg)
    decNumber.min (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the minimum of its arguments.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMin()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_minmag"><code>decnum:minmag</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:minmag (decarg)
    decNumber.minmag (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the one of its arguments that 
has the minimum magnitude. It is identical to 
<a href="#decnum_min"><code>decnum:min</code></a> except that the signs of the operands 
are ignored and taken to be 0 (non-negative).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMinMag()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_minus"><code>decnum:minus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:minus ()
    decnum:__unm ()
    decNumber.minus (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the result of subtracting 
the argument from 0.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__unm</code> to this function, the 
Lua unary minus operator (<code>-</code>) may be used with decimal numbers.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMinus()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_mod"><code>decnum:mod</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:mod (decarg)
    decnum:__mod (decarg)
    decNumber.mod (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is remainder of the left (1st) 
argument divided by the right (2nd) argument based on Lua rules 
for the mod operator (<code>%</code>). Lua defines</p>
<pre>
    a % b == a - floor(a/b)*b</pre>
<p>whereas the General Decimal Arithmetic Specification defines 
remainder using truncation.</p>
<p>The <code>mod</code> function is implemented as equal to 
<a href="#decnum_remainder"><code>decnum:remainder</code></a> if the signs of the 
arguments are the same or the remainder is zero, otherwise as 
equal to the remainder plus the divisor. The current context's 
rounding mode is used.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__mod</code> to this function, the 
Lua modulo operator (<code>%</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the 
left and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library functions <code>decNumberRemainder()</code>, 
<code>decNumberIsNegative()</code>, <code>decNumberIsZero()</code>, and <code>decNumberAdd()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_multiply"><code>decnum:multiply</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:multiply (decarg)
    decnum:__mul (decarg)
    decNumber.multiply (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the product of its arguments.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__mul</code> to this function, the Lua 
multiplication operator (<code>*</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the 
left and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberMultiply()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_nextminus"><code>decnum:nextminus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:nextminus ()
    decNumber.nextminus (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the closest value to the argument 
in the direction of -Infinity. This is computed as though by 
subtracting an infinitesimal amount from the argument 
using <code>ROUND_FLOOR</code>, except that no flags are set as long as the 
argument is a <code>decnum</code> (unless the argument is a signaling NaN).</p>
<p>This function is a generalization of the IEEE 754 <code>nextDown</code> 
operation.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberNextMinus()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_nextplus"><code>decnum:nextplus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:nextplus ()
    decNumber.nextplus (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the closest value to the argument 
in the direction of +Infinity. This is computed as though by 
adding an infinitesimal amount from the argument 
using <code>ROUND_CEILING</code>, except that no flags are set as long as the 
argument is a <code>decnum</code> (unless the argument is a signaling NaN).</p>
<p>This function is a generalization of the IEEE 754 <code>nextUp</code> 
operation.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberNextPlus()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_nexttoward"><code>decnum:nexttoward</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:nexttoward (decarg)
    decNumber.nexttoward (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the closest value to the first 
argument in the direction of the second argument. This is computed 
as though by adding or subtracting an infinitesimal amount to the 
first argument using either <code>ROUND_CEILING</code> or <code>ROUND_FLOOR</code>
depending on whether the second argument is larger or smaller than
the first argument. If the arguments are numerically equal, then 
the result is a copy of the first argument with the sign of the 
second argument. Flags are set as usual for an addition or 
subtraction (no flags are set in the equals case).</p>
<p>This function is a generalization of the IEEE 754 <code>nextAfter</code> 
operation.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberNextToward()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_normalize"><code>decnum:normalize</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:normalize ()
    decNumber.normalize (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the result of adding the argument 
to 0, and putting the result in its simplest form. That is, a non-zero 
number which has any trailing zeros in the coefficient has those zeros 
removed by dividing the coefficient by the appropriate power of ten 
and adjusting the exponent accordingly, and a zero has its exponent 
set to 0.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberNormalize()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_plus"><code>decnum:plus</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:plus ()
    decNumber.plus (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the result of adding the argument 
to 0. This takes place according to the settings given in the 
decimal context, following the usual arithmetic rules. This may 
therefore be used for rounding.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberPlus()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_power"><code>decnum:power</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:power (decarg)
    decnum:__pow (decarg)
    decNumber.power (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the left (1st) argument raised to 
the power of the right (2nd) argument.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__pow</code> to this function, the Lua 
power operator (<code>^</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the left 
and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberPower()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_quantize"><code>decnum:quantize</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:quantize (decarg)
    decNumber.quantize (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is numerically equal (except for 
any rounding) to the left (1st) argument but modified so its 
exponent has a specific value, equal to that of the right (2nd) 
argument. To achieve this, the coefficient of the result is 
adjusted (by rounding or shifting) so that its exponent has the 
requested value. For example, if the left (1st) argument had 
the value 123.4567, and the right (2nd) argument had the 
value 0.12, the result would be 123.46 (that is, 12346 with an 
exponent of -2, matching the right (2nd) argument).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberQuantize()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_remainder"><code>decnum:remainder</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:remainder (decarg)
    decNumber.remainder (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the remainder of the left (1st) 
argument divided by the right (2nd) argument. The identity</p>
<pre>
    lhs == (lhs:divideinteger(rhs) * rhs) + lhs:remainder(rhs)</pre>
<p>holds.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberRemainder()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_remaindernear"><code>decnum:remaindernear</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:remaindernear (decarg)
    decNumber.remaindernear (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the remainder of the left (1st) 
argument divided by the right (2nd) argument using the rules 
defined in IEEE 854. This follows the same definition as 
<a href="#decnum_remainder"><code>decnum:remainder</code></a>, except that the nearest 
integer quotient (or the nearest even integer if the remainder 
is equidistant from two) is used instead of the result from 
<a href="#decnum_divideinteger"><code>decnum:divideinteger</code></a>.</p>
<p>For example, <code>decNumber.remaindernear(10, 6)</code> has the result -2 
(instead of 4) because the multiple of 6 nearest to 10 is 12 
(rather than 6).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberRemainderNear()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_rescale"><code>decnum:rescale</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:rescale (decarg)
    decNumber.rescale (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is numerically equal (except for 
any rounding) to the left (1st) argument but modified so its exponent 
has the value of the right (2nd) argument. See 
<a href="#decnum_quantize"><code>decnum:quantize</code></a>. 
The right (2nd) argument must be a whole number (before any rounding); 
that is, any digits in the fractional part of the number must be zero.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberRescale()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_rotate"><code>decnum:rotate</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:rotate (decarg)
    decNumber.rotate (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the first argument with the digits 
of its coefficient rotated to the left (if the second argument is 
positive) or to the right (if the second argument is negative) 
without adjusting the exponent or the sign.</p>
<p>If the first argument has fewer digits than context <code>digits</code> the 
coefficient is padded with zeros on the left before the
rotate. Any leading zeros in the result are ignored, as usual.</p>
<p>The second argument is the count of digits to rotate; it must be an 
integer (that is, it must have an exponent of 0) and must be in the 
range <code>-digits</code> through <code>+digits</code> in the current context.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberRotate()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_samequantum"><code>decnum:samequantum</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:samequantum (decarg)
    decNumber.samequantum (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns the decimal number 1 when the exponents of the arguments are 
equal, or if they are both Infinities or they are both NaNs; in all 
other cases returns the decimal number 0. This function is used to 
test whether the exponents of two numbers are equal. The coefficients 
and signs of the arguments are ignored.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberSameQuantum()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_scaleb"><code>decnum:scaleb</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:scaleb (decarg)
    decNumber.scaleb (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>This function returns the result of multiplying the first argument by
ten raised to the power of the second argument. It is used to adjust 
(scale) the exponent of a number, using the rules of the <code>scaleB</code> 
operation in the IEEE 754r proposal. The second argument must be an 
integer (that is, it must have an exponent of 0) and it must also be 
in the range <code>-n</code> through <code>+n</code>, where <code>n</code> is 
<code>2 * (context.emax + context.digits)</code>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberScaleB()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_shift"><code>decnum:shift</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:shift (decarg)
    decNumber.shift (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the first argument with the digits 
of its coefficient shifted to the left (if the second argument is 
positive) or to the right (if the second argument is negative) 
without adjusting the exponent or the sign.</p>
<p>The coefficient is padded with zeros on the left or right, as 
necessary. Any leading zeros in the result are ignored, as usual.</p>
<p>The second argument is the count of digits to shift; it must be an 
integer (that is, it must have an exponent of 0) and must be in the 
range <code>-digits</code> through <code>+digits</code> in the current context.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberShift()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_squareroot"><code>decnum:squareroot</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:squareroot ()
    decNumber.squareroot (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the square root of its argument, 
rounded if necessary using the digits setting in the decimal context 
and using the round-half-even rounding algorithm.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberSquareRoot()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_subtract"><code>decnum:subtract</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:subtract (decarg)
    decnum:__sub (decarg)
    decNumber.subtract (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the left (1st) argument minus the 
right (2nd) argument.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__sub</code> to this function, the Lua 
subtraction operator (<code>-</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> on the left 
and a <code>decarg</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberSubtract()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_tointegralexact"><code>decnum:tointegralexact</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:tointegralexact ()
    decNumber.tointegralexact (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the argument with any fractional 
part removed, if necessary, using the rounding mode in the decimal 
context.</p>
<p>The <code>Inexact</code> flag is set if the result is numerically different 
from the argument. Other than that, no flags are set as long as the 
argument is a <code>decnum</code> (unless the argument is a signaling NaN).
The result may have a positive exponent.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberToIntegralExact()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_tointegralvalue"><code>decnum:tointegralvalue</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:tointegralvalue ()
    decNumber.tointegralvalue (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the argument with any fractional 
part removed, if necessary, using the rounding mode in the decimal 
context.</p>
<p>No flags, not even <code>Inexact</code>, are set as long as the 
argument is a <code>decnum</code> (unless the argument is a signaling NaN).
The result may have a positive exponent.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberToIntegralValue()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_trim"><code>decnum:trim</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:trim ()
    decNumber.trim (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the argument with any insignificant 
trailing zeros removed. That is, if the number has any fractional 
trailing zeros they are removed by dividing the coefficient by the 
appropriate power of ten and adjusting the exponent accordingly.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberTrim()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_xor"><code>decnum:xor</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:xor (decarg)
    decNumber.xor (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the digit-wise logical exclusive or 
of the arguments. Note that all digits of the arguments must be 0 or 
1 or else this operation returns NaN,</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberXor()</code>.</p>
<p><strong>Comparisons and Predicates</strong></p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_class"><code>decnum:class</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:class ()
    decNumber.class (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns the class of a decNumber. No error is possible. The class is
one of the decNumber <a href="#classifications">Classifications</a>.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberClass()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_classasstring"><code>decnum:classasstring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:classasstring ()
    decNumber.classasstring (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns the class of a decNumber as a string. No error is 
possible. The class is one of &quot;-Infinity&quot;, &quot;-Normal&quot;,  
&quot;-Subnormal&quot;, &quot;-Zero&quot;, &quot;+Zero&quot;, &quot;+Subnormal&quot;,
&quot;+Normal&quot;, &quot;+Infinity&quot;, &quot;NaN&quot;, &quot;sNaN&quot;, or &quot;Invalid&quot;</p>
<p>Uses the C library functions <code>decNumberClass()</code> and 
<code>decNumberClassToString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="classtostring"><code>classtostring</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decNumber.classtostring (enum)</pre>
<p>Converts the <a href="#classifications">Classifications</a> of a decNumber to a string. 
No error is possible. The class is one of &quot;-Infinity&quot;, 
&quot;-Normal&quot;, &quot;-Subnormal&quot;, &quot;-Zero&quot;, &quot;+Zero&quot;, &quot;+Subnormal&quot;,
&quot;+Normal&quot;, &quot;+Infinity&quot;, &quot;NaN&quot;, &quot;sNaN&quot;, or &quot;Invalid&quot;.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberClassToString()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_compare"><code>decnum:compare</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:compare (decarg)
    decNumber.compare (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the comparison of its arguments 
numerically. If the left (1st) argument is less than the right (2nd) 
argument then the result is -1. If they are equal (that is, when 
subtracted the result would be 0), then the result is 0. If the 
left (1st) argument is greater than the right (2nd) argument then the 
result is 1. If the operands are not comparable (that is, one or both 
is a NaN) then the result is NaN.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCompare()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_comparetotal"><code>decnum:comparetotal</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:comparetotal (decarg)
    decNumber.comparetotal (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the comparison of its arguments 
numerically using the IEEE 754r proposed ordering. The result is the 
similar to <a href="#decnum_compare"><code>decnum:compare</code></a> above, except that NaN 
is never returned. The total order differs from the numerical 
comparison in that:</p>
<pre>
    -NaN &lt;  -sNaN &lt; -Infinity &lt; -finites &lt; -0 &lt; +0 &lt; +finites &lt; +Infinity &lt; +sNaN &lt; +NaN.</pre>
<p>Also, <code>1.000 &lt; 1.0</code> (etc.) and NaNs are ordered by payload.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCompareTotal()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_comparetotalmag"><code>decnum:comparetotalmag</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:comparetotalmag (decarg)
    decNumber.comparetotalmag (decarg, decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a decimal number that is the comparison of the magnitude of 
its arguments using the IEEE 754r proposed ordering. It is identical 
to <a href="#decnum_comparetotal"><code>decnum:comparetotal</code></a> above except that 
the signs of the operands are ignored and taken to be 0 (non-negative).</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberCompareTotalMag()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_eq"><code>decnum:eq</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:eq (decarg)
    decnum:__eq (decarg)
    decNumber.eq (&lt;decarg&gt;, &lt;decarg&gt;)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true when the arguments are equal, false 
otherwise.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__eq</code> to this function, the Lua 
equality operators (<code>==</code> and <code>~=</code>) may be used with a <code>decnum</code> 
on the left and a <code>decnum</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library functions <code>decNumberCompare()</code> and 
<code>decNumberIsZero()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_iscanonical"><code>decnum:iscanonical</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:iscanonical ()
    decNumber.iscanonical (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns true always, because decNumbers always have canonical 
encodings (the function is provided for compatibility with the
IEEE 754r operation <code>isCanonical</code>). No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsCanonical()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isfinite"><code>decnum:isfinite</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isfinite ()
    decNumber.isfinite (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is finite, false 
otherwise (that is, the argument is an infinity or a NaN).
No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsFinite()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isinfinite"><code>decnum:isinfinite</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isinfinite ()
    decNumber.isinfinite (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is infinite, 
false otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsInfinite()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isnan"><code>decnum:isnan</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isnan ()
    decNumber.isnan (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is a NaN (quiet or 
signaling), false otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsNaN()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isnegative"><code>decnum:isnegative</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isnegative ()
    decNumber.isnegative (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is is normal (that 
is, finite, non-zero, and not subnormal), false otherwise.
No error is possible.</p>
<pre>

Uses the C library function C&lt;decNumberIsNegative()&gt;.</pre>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isnormal"><code>decnum:isnormal</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isnormal ()
    decNumber.isnormal (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is negative, false 
otherwise.  No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsNormal()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isqnan"><code>decnum:isqnan</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isqnan ()
    decNumber.isqnan (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is a quiet NaN, 
false otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsQNaN()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_issnan"><code>decnum:issnan</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:issnan ()
    decNumber.issnan (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is a signaling NaN, 
false otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsSNaN()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_isspecial"><code>decnum:isspecial</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:isspecial ()
    decNumber.isspecial (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument has a special 
value (Infinity or NaN), false otherwise; it is the inversion of 
<a href="#decnum_isfinite"><code>decnum:isfinite</code></a>. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsSpecial()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_issubnormal"><code>decnum:issubnormal</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:issubnormal ()
    decNumber.issubnormal (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is subnormal (that 
is, finite, non-zero, and not in the range of normal values), false 
otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsSubnormal()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_iszero"><code>decnum:iszero</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:iszero
    decNumber.iszero (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true if the argument is zero, false 
otherwise. No error is possible.</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberIsZero()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_le"><code>decnum:le</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:le (decarg)
    decnum:__le (decarg)
    decNumber.le (&lt;decarg&gt;, &lt;decarg&gt;)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true when left (1st) argument is less than 
or equal to the right (2nd) argument, false otherwise.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__le</code> to this function, the Lua 
comparison operators (<code>&lt;=</code> and <code>&gt;=</code>) may be used with a 
<code>decnum</code> on the left and a <code>decnum</code> on the right.</p>
<p>Uses the C library functions <code>decNumberCompare()</code> 
<code>decNumberIsNegative()</code> and <code>decNumberIsZero()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_lt"><code>decnum:lt</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:lt (decarg)
    decnum:__lt (decarg)
    decNumber.lt (&lt;decarg&gt;, &lt;decarg&gt;)</pre>
<p>Returns a boolean that is true when left (1st) argument is less than 
the right (2nd) argument, false otherwise.</p>
<p>Note that by binding the method <code>__lt</code> to this function, the Lua 
comparison operators (<code>&lt;</code> and <code>&gt;</code>) may be used with a 
<code>decnum</code> on the left and a <code>decnum</code> on the right. Lua also assumes 
that <code>a &lt;= b</code> is equivalent to <code>not (b &lt; a)</code> which in the 
presence of NaNs may or may not be what you want - if not, use 
<a href="#decnum_compare"><code>decnum:compare</code></a> directly.</p>
<p>Uses the C library functions <code>decNumberCompare()</code> and 
<code>decNumberIsNegative()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnum_radix"><code>decnum:radix</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decnum:radix ()
    decNumber.radix (decarg)</pre>
<p>Returns the radix (number base) used by the decNumber package. This
always returns 10. No error is possible..</p>
<p>Uses the C library function <code>decNumberRadix()</code>.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="operations_on_random_states">Operations on Random States</a></h1>
<p>The following functions operate on random states.</p>
<p>The random number generator in the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package is based 
on a lagged Fibonacci generator (&quot;LFIB4&quot;). George Marsaglia has this 
to say about LFIB4:</p>
<pre>
    LFIB4 is an extension of what I have previously defined as a 
    lagged Fibonacci generator [...] I have developed the 4-lag 
    generator LFIB4 using addition [...] Its period is 2^31*(2^256-1), 
    about 2^287, and it seems to pass all tests --- in particular, 
    those of the kind for which 2-lag generators using +,-, xor 
    seem to fail.</pre>
<p>The <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package uses LFIB4 to produce a stream of bits in 
10-bit chunks. This is convenient for making decimal numbers in 
multiples of three decimal digits, and fits with the default setting 
of the <strong>decNumber</strong> compile time parameter <code>DECDPUN</code>. If you change 
<code>DECDPUN</code> then you may not be able to use the <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package's
random states without modification to the C code. There is a compile
time setting <code>LDN_ENABLE_RANDOM</code> that should be defined to 0 to 
disable random state features.</p>
<p>The <strong>ldecNumber</strong> package random state code has been tested with 
L'Ecuyer and Simard's TestU01 Crush -- 
see <a href="http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~simardr/testu01/tu01.html">http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~simardr/testu01/tu01.html</a></p>
<pre>
    ========= Summary results of Crush =========
    Version:          TestU01-1.1
    Generator:        Generator dec12
    Number of statistics:  144
    Total CPU time:   02:55:11.06
    All tests were passed</pre>
<p>While this confers a great deal of confidence in the quality of the 
generator, two caveats are in order:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Crush uses IEEE doubles, and so the quality of the generator with more 
than a dozen or so digits is untested, though believed to be good</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>This generator was not designed for cryptographic use, and so is 
probably only useful for its intended applications: simulation 
and testing</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decnumber_randomstate"><code>decNumber.randomstate</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decNumber.randomstate ([a [, b [, c [, d]]]])</pre>
<p>Creates and returns a new random state <code>decrst</code>. If any arguments 
are not supplied, defaults are provided. The arguments <code>a</code>, <code>b</code>, 
<code>c</code>, and <code>d</code> are used as inputs to the random number generator 
KISS to initialize the random state.</p>
<p>The random state userdata has one method: <code>__call</code>. This means that 
the random state may be used as a function to return random values.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="decrst___call"><code>decrst:__call</code></a></h2>
<pre>
    decrst([digits [, exponent]])</pre>
<p>Returns a new random decimal number. If supplied, <code>digits</code> is the 
number of decimal digits in the new random decimal number; the default 
is 12. If supplied, <code>exponent</code> is the exponent of the new random 
decimal number; the default is <code>-digits</code> so the new random decimal 
number is between zero (inclusive) and one (exclusive).</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="version">VERSION</a></h1>
<p>This is <strong>ldecNumber</strong> version 21.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="credits">CREDITS</a></h1>
<p><strong>ldecNumber</strong> was developed by Doug Currie, Londonderry, NH, USA.</p>
<p><strong>decNumber</strong> was developed by Mike Cowlishaw at IBM.</p>
<p>
</p>
<hr />
<h1><a name="license">LICENSE</a></h1>
<p>The <strong>ldecNumber</strong> distribution includes the C source code of the wrapper
itself as a Lua module, a Makefile, examples, test code, and the 
decNumber source code from IBM. The decNumber code is licensed as 
follows (see <em>ICU-license.html</em> in the distribution):</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="icu_license___icu_1_8_1_and_later">ICU License - ICU 1.8.1 and later</a></h2>
<p>COPYRIGHT AND PERMISSION NOTICE</p>
<p>Copyright (c) 1995-2005 International Business Machines Corporation and others
All rights reserved.</p>
<p>Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
&quot;Software&quot;), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons
to whom the Software is furnished to do so, provided that the above
copyright notice(s) and this permission notice appear in all copies of
the Software and that both the above copyright notice(s) and this
permission notice appear in supporting documentation.</p>
<p>THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED &quot;AS IS&quot;, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT
OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR ANY SPECIAL
INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.</p>
<p>Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder
shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use
or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization
of the copyright holder.</p>
<p>--------------------------------------------------------------------------------</p>
<p>All trademarks and registered trademarks mentioned herein are the property of 
their respective owners.</p>
<p>
</p>
<h2><a name="ldecnumber_license">ldecNumber License</a></h2>
<p>The non-IBM Lua decNumber code and documentation are:</p>
<p>* Copyright (c) 2006-7 Doug Currie, Londonderry, NH</p>
<p>and licensed under the same terms as the ICU License, above.</p>
